---
layout: page
title: Research
menu: main
---
---

***GUIDE deconstructs genetic architectures using association studies*** \\
Daniel Lazarev, Grant Chau, Alex Bloemendal, Claire Churchhouse, Benjamin M Neale\\
See [preprint](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.05.03.592285v1){:target="blank"}.

<p style="font-size: 16px;"><b>Abstract:</b> Genome-wide association studies have revealed that the genetic architecture of most complex traits is characterized by a large number of distinct effects scattered across the genome. Functional enrichment analyses of these results suggest that the associations for any given complex trait are not purely random. Thus, we set out to leverage the genetic association results from many traits with a view to identifying the set of modules, or latent factors, that mediate these associations. The identification of such modules may aid in disease classification as well as the elucidation of complex disease mechanisms. We propose a method, Genetic Unmixing by Independent Decomposition (GUIDE), to estimate a set of statistically independent latent factors that best express the patterns of association across many traits. The resulting latent factors not only have desirable mathematical properties, such as sparsity and a higher variance explained (for both traits and variants), but are also able to single out and prioritize key biological features or pathophysiological mechanisms underlying a given trait or disease. Moreover, we show that these latent factors can index biological pathways as well as epidemiological and environmental influences that compose the genetic architecture of complex traits. </p>


---

***Efficient and accurate mixed model association tool for single-cell eQTL analysis*** \\
Wei Zhou, Anna Cuomo, Angli Xue, Masahiro Kanai, Grant Chau, Chirag Krishna, Ramnik J Xavier, Daniel G MacArthur, Joseph E Powell, Mark J Daly, Benjamin M Neale\\
See [preprint](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.05.15.24307317v1){:target="blank"}.

<p style="font-size: 16px;"><b>Abstract:</b> Understanding the genetic basis of gene expression can help us understand the molecular underpinnings of human traits and disease. Expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) mapping can help in studying this relationship but have been shown to be very cell-type specific, motivating the use of single-cell RNA sequencing and single-cell eQTLs to obtain a more granular view of genetic regulation. Current methods for single-cell eQTL mapping either rely on the pseudobulk approach and traditional pipelines for bulk transcriptomics or do not scale well to large datasets. Here, we propose SAIGE-QTL, a robust and scalable tool that can directly map eQTLs using single-cell profiles without needing aggregation at the pseudobulk level. Additionally, SAIGE-QTL allows for testing the effects of less frequent/rare genetic variation through set-based tests, which is traditionally excluded from eQTL mapping studies. We evaluate the performance of SAIGE-QTL on both real and simulated data and demonstrate the improved power for eQTL mapping over existing pipelines.</p>

---

***GUIDE learns interpretable latent factors from genetic association studies***  \\
Daniel Lazarev, Alex Bloemendal, Grant Chau, Claire Churchhouse, Benjamin Neale\\
[**ASHG 2023 Annual Meeting**](https://www.ashg.org/meetings/2023meeting/){:target="_blank"}\\
Poster Presentation delivered November 2, 2023 (co-presented).\\
See conference [published abstract](https://www.ashg.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/ASHG2023-PosterAbstracts.pdf#page=2149){:target="_blank"}.

<p style="font-size: 16px;"><b>Abstract:</b> Learning a set of modules, or latent factors, mediating the effects of a large set of SNPs on some set of complex traits can help inform disease classification and elucidate complex disease mechanisms, otherwise muddled by polygenic and pleiotropic effects. We propose a method, Genetic Unmixing by Independent DEcomposition (GUIDE), to estimate a set of statistically independent latent factors that best extract the information encoded in the underlying genetic architecture by picking a basis to express these factors that is simultaneously informed by the SNPs and traits corresponding to a set of summary statistics. In particular, GUIDE builds a three-layer network consisting of SNPs, traits, and latent factors that mediate their interactions, and picks a basis for the latent factors that maximizes the sparsity of interlayer weights, resulting in factors that are more enriched for particular traits and load onto sets of genetic variants that are more significantly associated with given diseases and disease pathways. For example, we built a GUIDE model using UK Biobank data and focused on Alzheimer’s disease (AD), peripheral vascular disease, and high cholesterol, finding that a common latent factor that explains a large part of the genetic variance for all three traits specifically and significantly implicates genes in the cholesterol metabolism pathway. Moreover, the top GUIDE factor for AD—explaining 87.5% of the genetic variance of the disease—is highly enriched for the APOE genes, with 49 of the top 54 loci in the 19:45386467-45445517 region near APOE contributing 50.9% of the variance of this latent factor. By contrast, the top factor for the state-of-the-art method based on principal component analysis explains only 10.2% of the genetic variance of AD, mostly picking up a host of related genes such as APOC, APOB, LDLR, among others, without significant enrichment for APOE, and with the top 50 loci—spanning most of the chromosomes—contributing only 12.7% of this factor’s variance. Moreover, GUIDE prioritizes genes, such as RBFOX1 (chr. 16), CSMD1 (chr. 8), and PCSK9 (chr. 1), which have only recently been implicated in AD. GUIDE thus allows using summary statistics for the construction of parsimonious and interpretable network models that deconvolve the shared and specific effects of SNPs on complex traits.</p>
---
***SAIGE-QTL: scalable and accurate expression quantitative trait locus mapping for single-cell studies*** \\
Wei Zhou, Anna Cuomo, Grant Chau, Masahiro Kanai, Chirag Krishna, Ramnik Xavier, Daniel MacArthur, Joseph Powell, Mark Daly, Benjamin Neale\\
[**ASHG 2023 Annual Meeting**](https://www.ashg.org/meetings/2023meeting/){:target="_blank"}\\
Platform Talk delivered November 4, 2023 (contributed).\\
See conference [published abstract](https://www.ashg.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/ASHG2023-PlatformAbstracts.pdf#page=221){:target="_blank"}.
<p style="font-size: 16px;"><b>Abstract:</b> eQTL mapping based on transcriptomes across multiple cell types and tissues provides evidence on functional genetic variants and facilitates understanding the molecular basis for human diseases when integrated with GWASs. More recently, single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) methods enable the most fine-grained view of cellular diversity and identification of eQTL with a heterogeneity of genetic effects across cellular contexts. However, major limitations remain in current eQTL mapping methods for scRNA-seq data. Here, we propose a scalable and accurate computational method to efficiently map the genetic basis of transcriptomes measured by scRNA-seq for common and rare genetic variations.
Our method, called SAIGE-QTL, is an extension of the previously developed mixed model method SAIGE for GWASs in large-scale biobanks and data sets. It conducts genome-wide eQTL analysis using scRNA-seq data based on the Poisson mixed models to account for within-sample cellular heterogeneity, between-sample relatedness, and population stratifications through multiple random effects. It performs set-based association tests for more powerful analysis of rare variants and identifies cell context-specific eQTLs with interactions of genotype and cellular contexts included in the models. SAIGE-QTL is feasible for identifying cis- and trans-eQTLs in large-scale RNA-seq data of hundreds of thousands or even millions of cells from hundreds to thousands of individuals. The extensive simulation studies demonstrated that SAIGE-QTL has well controlled type I error rates. We applied it to the OneK1K cohort, which consists of scRNA-seq data on PBMCs from ~1,000 donors and assessed the association power of sc-eQTL in the preliminary analysis of naive B cells (n = 81,284 cells) for 8,314 genes expressed in at least 1% of the cells. Strikingly, the sc-eQTL analysis outperformed the analysis using pseudobulk data with a 21% increase in average χ2 statistics in 1,072 Bonferroni corrected-significant cis-eQTLs with p< 6.01x10-6 in either analysis. We identified ~25% more eQTLs using SAIGE-QTL compared to previous pseudobulk analysis (FDR<5%), and the two analyses have highly correlated effect size estimates of cis-eQTLs (Pearson’s R2 = 0.98). We are applying SAIGE-QTL to the full OneK1K data with sixteen cell types to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of the genetic regulation of gene expressions.
In summary, we develop a novel computational method that addresses the unsolved analytical challenges for systematic genetic analysis on single-cell transcriptomics, offering the potential to interpret complex trait associations through genome-wide colocalization events.</p>
